The moment a Chinese spy decided to defect to Australia

Skip to sections navigationSkip to contentSkip to footer

  * [Our network](javascript:void\(0\);)
  * [Subscribe](https://subscribe.smh.com.au/?promote_channel=HI_SMH_GNL_HL)Log In

 _Open_ Menu

[

## The Sydney Morning Herald

](/)

[Subscribe](https://subscribe.smh.com.au/?promote_channel=HI_SMH_GNL_HL)-

[

## The Sydney Morning Herald

](/)

closeSearch Site

  * Sections
  * Network

  * [Home](/)
  * [Sydney](/sydney-news)
  * [NSW](/national/nsw)
  * [Politics](/politics)Show subsections
    * [Federal](/politics/federal)
    * [NSW](/politics/nsw)
    * [Victoria](/politics/victoria)
    * [Queensland](/politics/queensland)
    * [Western Australia](/politics/western-australia)
  * [Business](/business)Show subsections
    * [Companies](/business/companies)
    * [Markets](/business/markets)
    * [The economy](/business/the-economy)
    * [Banking & finance](/business/banking-and-finance)
    * [Small business](/business/small-business)
    * [Consumer affairs](/business/consumer-affairs)
    * [Workplace](/business/workplace)
  * [World](/world)Show subsections
    * [North America](/world/north-america)
    * [Europe](/world/europe)
    * [Asia](/world/asia)
    * [Middle East](/world/middle-east)
    * [Oceania](/world/oceania)
    * [Central America](/world/central-america)
    * [South America](/world/south-america)
    * [Africa](/world/africa)
  * [National](/national)Show subsections
    * [Victoria](/national/victoria)
    * [Queensland](/national/queensland)
    * [Western Australia](/national/western-australia)
  * [Opinion](/opinion)
  * [Property](http://www.domain.com.au)
  * [Sport](/sport)Show subsections
    * [NRL](/sport/nrl)
    * [Rugby union](/sport/rugby-union)
    * [AFL](/sport/afl)
    * [Soccer](/sport/soccer)
    * [Cricket](/sport/cricket)
    * [Netball](/sport/netball)
    * [Racing](/sport/racing)
    * [Motorsport](/sport/motorsport)
    * [Cycling](/sport/cycling)
    * [Tennis](/sport/tennis)
    * [Basketball](/sport/basketball)
    * [Golf](/sport/golf)
    * [NFL](/sport/nfl)
    * [Athletics](/sport/athletics)
    * [Swimming](/sport/swimming)
    * [Boxing](/sport/boxing)
  * [Culture](/culture)Show subsections
    * [Movies](/culture/movies)
    * [TV & radio](/culture/tv-and-radio)
    * [Music](/culture/music)
    * [Celebrity](/culture/celebrity)
    * [Books](/culture/books)
    * [Comedy](/culture/comedy)
    * [Dance](/culture/dance)
    * [Musicals](/culture/musicals)
    * [Opera](/culture/opera)
    * [Theatre](/culture/theatre)
    * [Art & design](/culture/art-and-design)
    * [TV guide](https://tvguide.smh.com.au)
  * [Lifestyle](/lifestyle)Show subsections
    * [Life & relationships](/lifestyle/life-and-relationships)
    * [Health & wellness](/lifestyle/health-and-wellness)
    * [Gender](/lifestyle/gender)
    * [Fashion](/lifestyle/fashion)
    * [Beauty](/lifestyle/beauty)
    * [Horoscopes](/topic/horoscopes-5yc)
  * [Money](/money)Show subsections
    * [Super & retirement](/money/super-and-retirement)
    * [Investing](/money/investing)
    * [Banking](/money/banking)
    * [Borrowing](/money/borrowing)
    * [Saving](/money/saving)
    * [Tax](/money/tax)
    * [Planning & budgeting](/money/planning-and-budgeting)
    * [Insurance](/money/insurance)
  * [Education](/education)
  * [Healthcare](/healthcare)
  * [Environment](/environment)Show subsections
    * [Conservation](/environment/conservation)
    * [Climate change](/environment/climate-change)
    * [Sustainability](/environment/sustainability)
    * [Weather](/environment/weather)
  * [Technology](/technology)Show subsections
    * [Video games](/technology/video-games)
    * [Home tech](/topic/home-technology-hqq)
    * [Phones](/topic/phones-5zt)
    * [Gadgets](/topic/gadgets-hqp)
  * [Drive](http://www.drive.com.au)
  * [Traveller](http://www.traveller.com.au)
  * [Good Food](http://www.goodfood.com.au)
  * [Executive style](http://www.executivestyle.com.au)

  * [Today's Paper](javascript:void\(0\))
  * [For subscribers](/topic/for-subscribers-1rt)
  * [Letters](/topic/smh-letters-1r7)
  * [Editorial](/topic/smh-editorial-1r6)
  * [Column 8](/topic/column-8-1r4)
  * [Obituaries](/topic/obituaries-1qv)

  * [Good Weekend](/topic/good-weekend-1qq)
  * [Explainers](/topic/explainers-1lz9)
  * [Quizzes](/topic/quizzes-1qx)
  * [Weather](http://weather.smh.com.au/local-forecast/nsw/sydney)

  * The Sydney Morning Herald
  * [The Age](https://www.theage.com.au)
  * [Brisbane Times](https://www.brisbanetimes.com.au)
  * [WAtoday](https://www.watoday.com.au)
  * [The Australian Financial Review](https://www.afr.com)

  * [Domain](https://www.domain.com.au)
  * [Commercial Real Estate](https://www.commercialrealestate.com.au)
  * [Drive](https://www.drive.com.au)
  * [Good Food](https://www.goodfood.com.au)
  * [Traveller](http://www.traveller.com.au)
  * [Executive Style](http://www.executivestyle.com.au)

  * [Find A Babysitter](https://www.findababysitter.com.au)
  * [The Store](https://www.thestore.com.au)
  * [Weatherzone](http://www.weatherzone.com.au)
  * [RSVP](https://www.rsvp.com.au)

Advertisement

  * [China's Spy Secrets](/topic/china-s-spy-secrets--1naz "China's Spy Secrets")

# The moment a Chinese spy decided to defect to Australia

Staring at his own face in a false passport triggered something in Wang
Liqiang. After five years as a Chinese spy he was at risk of losing himself.
So he decided to defect to Australia.

By [Nick McKenzie](/by/nick-mckenzie-hve6q "Articles by Nick McKenzie"), Grace
Tobin and [Paul Sakkal](/by/paul-sakkal-h17jxj "Articles by Paul Sakkal")

November 23, 2019

![Wang Liqiang now lives in hiding in Australia after abandoning his life as a
Chinese
spy.](https://static.ffx.io/images/$zoom_0.3765%2C$multiply_0.3541%2C$ratio_1%2C$width_1059%2C$x_572%2C$y_43/t_crop_custom/q_86%2Cf_auto/611f06957fab2350eef088c5896635c9a9129a09)

Wang Liqiang now lives in hiding in Australia after abandoning his life as a
Chinese spy.Credit:Illustration: Mark Stehle, Portrait: Steven Siewert

Normal text sizeLarger text sizeVery large text size

Most spies face a moment that challenges their loyalty. But rarely does it
make them consider the unimaginable – risking jail or worse for renouncing
their country.

For fresh-faced Chinese intelligence operative Wang “William” Liqiang, the
arrival of a fake South Korean passport earlier this year triggered such a
moment.

The name, date and place of birth on the passport belonged to someone else but
the photo was his. His orders were to shift his attention from a covert
operation to undermine Hong Kong’s democracy movement and focus instead on
meddling in Taiwan’s 2020 elections. The ultimate aim was to topple President
Tsai Ing-wen.

But staring at his own face in the false passport stirred something in Wang.
After five years as a “cut-out” or “co-optee” for the Chinese military
intelligence system, he realised he was at risk of losing himself. As he would
later write, he was on the cusp of becoming “a person without real identity”.

And so the unimaginable — along with its attended risks of detention,
denunciation and death — began to take shape in his mind.

In April, Wang travelled to Australia to visit his wife, who was studying
here, and their young son. In Sydney, playing with a child he barely knew, the
27-year-old began to ponder the fallout of not returning to Hong Kong. He felt
it too dangerous to put pen to paper but he began composing a letter in his
mind.

Advertisement

The imagined addressee was the Australian government. The imagined contents
would detail his role in Chinese intelligence operations. It would provide an
unprecedented insider’s account of the extensive espionage and foreign
interference network which operates with seeming impunity in Taiwan, Hong Kong
and Australia. He would also describe the lure of democracy, the system he had
devoted his past few years to destroying.

In late May, while he was still in Sydney, Wang was issued orders to travel to
Taiwan under the fake identity. He made up his mind.

It would be several months before he would receive a phone call from ASIO
directing him to meet a man on a street corner at a certain time. But now
there was no turning back. He had decided to betray the most powerful and
ruthless authoritarian country in the world.

###  **‘The word spy didn’t cross our mind’**

Wang Liqiang was born to a middle-class family in Fujian, the Chinese province
ringed on one side by the grand Wuyi mountains and on the other by a
180-kilometre stretch of water separating the mainland from Taiwan. His father
was a regional Communist Party official who provided for his family as China’s
prosperity grew.

[Loading](javascript:void\(0\);)[

###

](javascript:void\(0\);)

[Replay

###

Replay video](javascript:void\(0\);)[Play video

###

](javascript:void\(0\);)[Play video

###

](javascript:void\(0\);)

Taiwan is a short distance over the water but the gulf with the mainland runs
deep. Ruling the island and its territories is central to President Xi
Jinping’s dream of a reunified China. The Taiwanese and Chinese governments do
not interact directly, creating a major political faultline in East Asia.

Advertisement

Taiwan’s Deputy Foreign Minister Hsu Szu-chien says democracy in Taiwan is an
existential threat to Xi’s increasingly authoritarian realm.

“Xi has treated our incumbent government as an enemy,” Hsu tells _The Age_ ,
_The Sydney Morning_ _Herald_ and _60 Minutes,_ adding that Taiwan is coming
under “severe” pressure. Senior United States officials have long identified
Chinese government interference and espionage work in Taiwan but the lack of
confirmation from a Chinese government insider has allowed the Chinese
Communist Party to deny it.

Wang did not learn about these deep historical rifts until he was an arts
student majoring in oil painting at Anhui University of Finance and Economics.
At the time, he viewed them through the prism of patriotic loyalty to the
Chinese nation.

![Wang Liqiang with other students at art school in Hong
Kong.](https://static.ffx.io/images/$zoom_0.232%2C$multiply_0.4431%2C$ratio_1.5%2C$width_756%2C$x_0%2C$y_63/t_crop_custom/q_86%2Cf_auto/7bf720bb7272eb6b56b0c6b6c4c11faf63db5469)

Wang Liqiang with other students at art school in Hong Kong.

When a senior university official suggested Wang work in Hong Kong at China
Innovation Investment Limited (CIIL), a listed diversified investment company
with interests in technology, finance and media, he jumped at the chance.
Whether he was tapped due to his promise or his patriotism, Wang does not
know.

He moved to Hong Kong in 2014 and quickly realised he was not working for a
normal company. Chinese website Sina describes the firm’s “main direction [as]
investing in the high-quality defence industry assets of both listed and
unlisted [People’s Republic of China] companies”. But he overheard company
representatives whispering about more sensitive dealings with officials.

When Wang finally twigged that advancing the aims of the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) and its military would underpin much of his work, he was unfazed.
“To be honest, for a Chinese, this was attractive,” he recalls. “It paid well
and I also felt that I was doing things for the country. At that time, the
word 'spy' didn’t cross our mind … [It was] a derogatory term.”

Advertisement

###  **An extraordinary admission**

It was Wang’s skill with a paintbrush that propelled him into the company’s
inner sanctum. In early 2015, CIIL’s chief executive officer Xin Xiang asked
Wang to teach his wife, Qing Gong, oil painting.

“Winning her favour was one key point as [to] why I could become a core
member,” he says.

![One of Wang's oil
paintings.](https://static.ffx.io/images/$zoom_0.444%2C$multiply_0.4431%2C$ratio_1.5%2C$width_756%2C$x_213%2C$y_75/t_crop_custom/q_86%2Cf_auto/978c7bca8242a6f69ba783ce9491ca627dd973b6)

One of Wang's oil paintings.

Invited to the couple’s Hong Kong house, Wang says his boss gradually took him
into his confidence. Xiang revealed his actual name was Xiang Nianxin and that
in the 1980s and early ’90s he had worked for the Chinese military controlled
Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence and
Defence Industries – an organisation dedicated to building China’s weapons
program.

Xiang also claimed to have worked for high-ranking Communist official Zou
Jiahua, a former vice-premier who in the 1980s helped develop China’s defence
industry by acquiring foreign military technology.

Xiang told Wang he had come to Hong Kong in 1993 to conduct intelligence work.
CIIL was created under the People’s Liberation Army General Staff Department
to “infiltrate into Hong Kong’s financial market, as well as collecting
military intelligence”, Wang says. Corporate records and newspaper archives
reveal CIIL’s close connection to Norinco, the Chinese military’s main weapons
company.

Advertisement

Xiang told Wang his most important work was “to buy other countries’ weapons
and steal US intelligence from them”. As a result, the US had been closely
monitoring him. The weapons, he said, were taken to Hong Kong. A spokesman for
CIIL said Xiang did not want to answer questions from _The Age,_ the _Herald_
and _60 Minutes_ over the phone, because he had never spoken to the
journalists who were calling, and when questions were emailed to Xiang, the
spokesman said Xiang would not answer because he could not verify that the
email was not sent covertly by the Australian government in order to obtain
intelligence.

After the story was initially published, an email response from a man called
Edison Li said, "Anyone with a little common sense will know that these
problems are ridiculous and untrue, and the accuser very likely did this for
economic purposes. We will refer the matter to the lawyer."

Wang says that he became an important part of the operation run by Xiang. The
opening paragraph of a lengthy and sworn statement Wang provided to ASIO in
October pulls no punches: “I have personally been involved and participated in
a series of espionage activities.”

It’s an extraordinary admission which comes as tension between Hong Kong and
the mainland has erupted into violence. Western security sources say Wang is
telling the truth.

###  **The Causeway Bay Five**

The intelligence operation that Wang joined has its headquarters in an
unassuming office tower on Hong Kong’s Des Voeux Road West, a busy strip
dominated by hawkers selling dried seafood.

The Hong Kong protesters have marched past the building, chanting slogans
about democracy, extradition and Beijing’s tightening grip. But the case that
terrified Hong Kongers more than anything before rallies became sieges was the
disappearance of five booksellers from the nearby Causeway Bay Books.

Advertisement

The Causeway Bay Five disappeared in October 2015, only to reappear on the
Chinese mainland and reveal they had been detained and interrogated. The
Chinese government has steadfastly denied allegations any were kidnapped. One,
Lee Bo, told a pro-CCP television station that he had returned voluntarily.

Wang tells a different story. The reason for the kidnapping, he says, was that
the bookshop was selling works that displeased the CCP, including a book
called _Xi and his Six Women_.

Loading

“[Our operative] told us later that he sent six agents who took Lee Bo from
the storeroom of Causeway Bay Books directly to mainland China,” Wang says,
adding that the operation was organised and overseen by figures inside CIIL.
“I was responsible for the negotiation and tasks to be implemented … me and
[the team chief] held the negotiation at Xiang Xin’s home,” Wang says.

Western security sources say Wang’s account is likely to be accurate. It’s
backed by another of the detained booksellers, Lam Wing-Kee, who during an
interview last month said he has no doubt that Lee Bo was kidnapped. Lam has
fled to Taiwan to avoid the terrifying ordeal of being detained again.

The fear this operation provoked in Hong Kong was intentional, Wang says. The
Chinese government wanted to “bring a thorough deterrent effect on those
people”.

###  **A ‘core, central agency’**

Wang says Xiang’s company was a front. Its real business was as a “core,
central agency” of Beijing’s intelligence apparatus. “It is in direct contact
with the Chinese side … playing the role of communicating between the top
level and lower levels … of military intelligence.”

Wang was a middleman who did both intelligence and political interference
work, passing orders from bosses in Beijing to operatives in Hong Kong. He
claims he met with senior military figures on trips to China and that senior
figures from CIIL liaised with the People’s Liberation Army’s General Staff
Department (since renamed and restructured) and other agencies and officials.
Wang says Xiang was in personal contact with the executive officer in Xi
Jinping’s office.

Former CIA analyst and co-author of the recently released _Chinese Communist
Espionage: An Intelligence Primer_ Peter Mattis says Wang appears to be a
“cut-out" or "co-optee". “They act as adjutants to the intelligence officer,
who is often building up a suite of resources to use for intelligence or
political influence.”

US counter-intelligence assessments say China’s espionage system uses cut-outs
“under a variety of covers, posing as diplomats, journalists, academics, or
business people” who are “tasked with spotting, assessing, targeting,
collecting, and running sources”.

Wang says he was sworn to secrecy – with one exception. He could talk to the
woman he was teaching to paint, Xiang’s wife Qing Gong, because he claims she
was part of Xiang's inner circle. As Wang grew close to Qing, he filed away
details he learnt about her life. She had become intimate with the
intelligence operations being undertaken in Hong Kong and Taiwan. She had also
spent time as a postgraduate student at the University of South Australia.
This last detail would make Wang wary about fleeing to Australia.

“This is something that I am scared of. As she studied in Australia, I don’t
know how many personnel there are in... [the] intelligence network.”

###  **‘They would be willing to work for us’**

Hong Kong’s tertiary sector, which has since exploded into violence, was a key
battleground for Wang. His organisation targeted students through fronts
including the China Science and Technology Education Foundation, a charity
recognised by the Hong Kong government. Corporate records confirm it is
controlled by Xiang.

“They have infiltrated into all universities, including students’ associations
and other students’ groups and bodies,” Wang says. “[Some of] the mainland
Chinese students … if they are given some petty favours and benefits and
opportunities to attend some occasions, they would be willing to work for us.”

![Protesters covered with umbrellas during campus protests in Hong
Kong.](https://static.ffx.io/images/$zoom_0.272%2C$multiply_0.4431%2C$ratio_1.5%2C$width_756%2C$x_0%2C$y_0/t_crop_custom/q_86%2Cf_auto/23795239e694a34579b139e5f74188f1422975e5)

Protesters covered with umbrellas during campus protests in Hong
Kong.Credit:AP

Wang was put in charge of organising and “educating” mainland students,
“guiding their ideology”.

“I exchanged ideas with them and learnt about their thinking, then I
influenced them with patriotism, guiding them to love the country, love the
Party and our leaders, and fight back strongly against those independence and
democracy activists in Hong Kong.”

He helped set up alumni associations to build a network and counter
dissidents.

“We sent some students to join the students’ association and they pretended to
support Hong Kong independence,” Wang says. “They found out information about
those pro-independence activists … and conducted human flesh search [a Chinese
term for researching using internet media such as blogs and forums]”. Then
they “made public all their personal data, their parents’ and family members’,
then we attacked them verbally, swearing at them.

“[We] effectively silenced them.”

Another battleground for CIIL was Hong Kong’s media. Wang says the company
invested in outlets, appointing and influencing senior media personnel to
support the CCP’s message and drown out dissenting voices.

“A lot of media outlets are under [Xiang’s] control - he either holds actual
or nominal shares or his company holds shares. Currently, the battlefield in
Hong Kong is mainly one of public opinion.”

One of the most senior intelligence operatives in Hong Kong, according to
Wang, was a senior manager of a major Asian television network. He also played
a vital role in the kidnapping of bookseller Lee Bo. The _Herald_ , _Age_ and
_60 Minutes_ have decided not to name the executive for legal reasons.

“He was the one responsible for organising the agents to kidnap and persecute
Hong Kong democracy activists,” he says, claiming the man “is a current
military cadre with a Division Commander rank.”

###  **‘China could do whatever they wanted’**

Kidnapping the bookseller scarred Wang. He realised that “China could do
whatever they wanted. So I felt quite scared in Hong Kong."

Adding to his fear were the alliances between members of his organisation and
the triads – Chinese mafia organisations “who also represent the Chinese
government”.

Painting became Wang’s escape. His art took on a shimmering, colourful
quality, evoking places and feelings far from the steel and concrete of the
city. When he talked to his wife Mia, who was studying in Australia, he never
wanted their conversations to end.

![Painting by
Wang.](https://static.ffx.io/images/$zoom_0.418%2C$multiply_0.8862%2C$ratio_0.666667%2C$width_378%2C$x_28%2C$y_80/t_crop_custom/q_86%2Cf_auto/cc624e8bc7c08ebd5ec2fd2ae03760783866e7af)

Painting by Wang.

In January 2017, Mia told him she was pregnant. He wondered how he would tell
his child about his job and what sort of life they would have in Hong Kong or
the mainland. But his bosses wanted him to keep working.

The so-called “nine-in-one” elections in Taiwan in 2018 (during which
officials from county magistrates to local mayors were elected) presented
Beijing with an opportunity to challenge the rule of President Tsai Ing-wen.
Wang helped direct a major operation which was ultimately aimed at throwing
Tsai out of office in favour of a pro-Beijing candidate.

“Our work on Taiwan was the most important work of ours – the infiltration
into media, temples and grassroots organisations,” says Wang.

He helped Chinese intelligence agencies build a “cyber army”, largely of
university students, to shift political debate and candidates’ fortunes.

“In Taiwan we had many places - restaurants, and IT companies - which we
either acquired or funded,” Wang says. “If we wanted to attack someone, we
could instantly collapse their Facebook” from Hong Kong, using false IP
addresses to put out anti-democracy messages.

> I know very well that the Chinese Communist Party can never be trusted. Once
> I go back, I will be dead.
>
> Chinese spy Wang Liqiang

Wang says CIIL also invested in Taiwanese media companies and built covert
alliances with TV stations, allowing the control and censorship of news. He
names food manufacturer and media owner the Want Want group as a key ally.

“We also controlled media, like buying their ads to propagate the trend, and
let them report in favour of those candidates we were supporting,” says Wang.
Want Want’s owner Tsai Eng-meng has had “a very close relationship and
cooperation with Xiang Xin,” Wang says. A _Financial Times_ article in August
accusing Want Want of taking editorial direction from Beijing was dismissed by
the company as “fake news”.

As well as directing positive media attention towards favoured politicians,
including presidential candidate Han Kuo-yu, Wang claims he helped finance
grassroots political support for the opposition. “With the Kuomintang [the
Chinese Nationalist Party] candidates we … gave them full support. Then we
also made donations to the temples and organised those believers to tour
mainland China and Hong Kong, and influence them with [the CCP-aligned] United
Front propaganda. As a result, we had a huge win ... and it was a glorious
record,” Wang says.

###  **‘My heart is extremely sad’**

For Wang it was a hollow victory. His son had been born in November 2017. Wang
wanted to travel to Australia to visit him but his success in the 2018 Taiwan
elections meant he was given a new task: interfering in the 2020 presidential
election with the aim of unseating Tsai. This was when he received the
envelope bearing fake identity papers.

“I was requested to change my name and whole identity to go to Taiwan and be a
spy there,” he says.

Part of Wang’s interference would rely on what he calls “Taiwan’s black
society”, or the triads. But Wang feared being caught by Taiwan’s counter-
espionage authorities. Out of hours, he painted furiously and plotted his
escape.

“If anything happened to me, my family would be ruined. What would my family,
my young son do? Who could protect me?”

Earlier this year, Wang told his boss’ wife that he needed to travel to
Australia to visit his son. He flew into Sydney on April 23 knowing he would
neither return home nor see his parents again.

“Whenever I think of this, I am very sad. My family, not only my parents, but
also my grandparents … I dare not communicate much as our phones are tapped.
This is the saddest thing … my heart is extremely sad and no words can express
my grief,” Wang says.

![Defector Wang Liqiang is now in hiding in
Sydney.](https://static.ffx.io/images/$zoom_0.43%2C$multiply_0.3541%2C$ratio_1%2C$width_1059%2C$x_646%2C$y_64/t_crop_custom/q_86%2Cf_auto/5971ef684dfe204d30e7fcf06a27dec999cb9bad)

Defector Wang Liqiang is now in hiding in Sydney.Credit:Steven Siewert

Both his family and his wife’s have a strong Communist Party pedigree – all
are party members and loyal to the country. “I really have no idea what this
will bring to the rest of my life,” he says.

It took seven months after Wang arrived before he was called by ASIO – it is
likely that ASIO did not know his intelligence value until his application for
protection reached an immigration official. In the meantime, Wang moved from
house to house and took counter-surveillance measures, watching for people
following him and changing his routine. He painted and played with his son and
watched the protests in Hong Kong get bigger as those he had likely recruited
hit back.

Gradually, his worldview changed.

“China’s view of life and the world simply cannot create outstanding talents
because it is totalitarianism, it is dictatorship,” Wang says. “I hope that my
child and my family can ... do something for human beings. I feel that in
Australia this can be achieved.”

Wang will not say what he has disclosed to ASIO. But he is willing to help the
Australian government understand China’s intelligence system and he has
knowledge about operatives. Mattis says Wang’s disclosures are unprecedented
and valuable – and also extraordinarily brave. Until now, the relatively small
number of defectors have kept quiet.

Loading

Wang says he hopes his public comments will energise the fight for human
rights and democracy in Hong Kong and Taiwan. He describes his decision to
take on the Chinese government and its powerful intelligence operation as an
ant challenging an elephant. But at the very least, he says his son will one
day understand that he stood up for what counts.

For now, though, he is in no man’s land, counting down the days of his tourist
visa and watching his back.

“I know very well that the Chinese Communist Party can never be trusted. Once
I go back, I will be dead.”

 **More on Chinese operations in Australia in _The Sunday Age_ , _The Sun-
Herald_ , _60 Minutes_ and _The Age_ and the _Herald_ on Monday.**

[License this
article](http://rightsportal.copyright.com.au/pages/republicationpage.aspx?author=Nick%20McKenzie%20and%20Paul%20Sakkal&publication=SMH&publicationdate=2019-11-22T18%3A00%3A00Z&publisher=fxj&title=The%20moment%20a%20Chinese%20spy%20decided%20to%20defect%20to%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.smh.com.au%2Fnational%2Fthe-
moment-a-chinese-spy-decided-to-defect-to-australia-20191122-p53d0x.html)

  * [China's Spy Secrets](/topic/china-s-spy-secrets--1naz)
  * [CCP influence](/topic/chinese-communist-party-influence-1m29)
  * [Weekend features](/topic/weekend-features-1n5l)
  * [China](/topic/china-89a)
  * [CCP](/topic/chinese-communist-party-1n85)
  * [Investigation](/topic/investigation-1qr)

##### [Nick McKenzie](/by/nick-mckenzie-hve6q "Articles by Nick McKenzie")

  * [Twitter](//twitter.com/@ageinvestigates?lang=en)
  * [Email](mailto:nmckenzie@theage.com.au)

Nick McKenzie is an investigative reporter for The Age. He's won seven Walkley
awards and covers politics, business, foreign affairs and defence, human
rights issues, the criminal justice system and social affairs.

##### [Paul Sakkal](/by/paul-sakkal-h17jxj "Articles by Paul Sakkal")

  * [Twitter](//twitter.com/@paulsakkal?lang=en)
  * [Email](mailto:paul.sakkal@theage.com.au)

Paul is a reporter for The Age.

## Most Viewed in National

Loading

[

## The Sydney Morning Herald

](/)

  * [Twitter](https://twitter.com/smh)
  * [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/sydneymorningherald)
  * [Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/sydneymorningherald)
  * [RSS](/rssheadlines)

### [Our Sites](javascript:void\(0\))

  * [The Sydney Morning Herald](https://www.smh.com.au)
  * [The Age](https://www.theage.com.au)
  * [Brisbane Times](https://www.brisbanetimes.com.au)
  * [WAtoday](https://www.watoday.com.au)
  * [The Australian Financial Review](https://www.afr.com)
  * [Domain](https://www.domain.com.au)
  * [Traveller](http://www.traveller.com.au)
  * [Good Food](https://www.goodfood.com.au)
  * [Executive Style](http://www.executivestyle.com.au)
  * [The Store](https://www.thestore.com.au)
  * [Drive](https://www.drive.com.au)
  * [CarAdvice](https://www.caradvice.com.au)
  * [RSVP](https://www.rsvp.com.au)
  * [Weatherzone](http://www.weatherzone.com.au)

### [Classifieds](javascript:void\(0\))

  * [Tributes](http://tributes.smh.com.au/obituaries/smh-au/)
  * [Celebrations](http://celebrations.smh.com.au/celebration/smh-au/)
  * [Place your ad](https://advertisers.com.au)
  * [Commercial Real Estate](https://www.commercialrealestate.com.au)
  * [Oneflare](https://www.oneflare.com.au)

### [The Sydney Morning Herald](javascript:void\(0\))

  * [Contact & support](/contact-us)
  * [Advertise with us](https://www.adcentre.com.au/brands/the-sydney-morning-herald)
  * [Newsletters](https://smh.myfairfax.com.au/members/lite_session/new?callback_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fsmh.myfairfax.com.au%2Fbeta%2Fmembers%2Fmy_account%2Fnewsletters%3Fchannel_key%3DzHE9EWDHf1XPuz3Phk0YIg%26callback_uri%3Dhttps%253a%252f%252fwww.smh.com.au&channel_key=zHE9EWDHf1XPuz3Phk0YIg)
  * [Accessibility guide](/siteguide/accessibility)
  * [Sitemap](/siteguide)
  * [Photo sales](https://consumer.fairfaxsyndication.com/C.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=FXJFX2_2_VForm)
  * [Purchase front pages](https://frontpages.fairfaxsyndication.com/C.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=FXJFX2_3_VForm)
  * [Content licensing](https://www.fairfaxsyndication.com/C.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=FXJO50_1)
  * [Our events](http://www.fairfaxevents.com.au)
  * [Work with us](https://www.fairfaxmediacareers.com/home)
  * [Conditions of use](/conditions-of-use)
  * [Privacy policy](/privacy)
  * [Press Council](https://www.presscouncil.org.au/what-we-do)

### [Products & Services](javascript:void\(0\))

  * [Subscription packages](https://subscribe.smh.com.au/?promote_channel=HI_SMH_GNL_FT)
  * [Subscriber benefits](https://subscribers.smh.com.au)
  * [My account](https://www.smh.com.au/myaccount)
  * [Subscriptions FAQs](https://subscribers.smh.com.au/support-centre/overview)
  * [Today's Paper](javascript:void\(0\))

Copyright © 2019

[Feedback](https://www.thesmhinsider.com.au/c/a/5dAvszx5Lm7C4GDU21EWmQ?dPanel=2)[Subscribe](https://subscribe.smh.com.au/?promote_channel=HI_SMH_GNL_FT)

